Advanced Machine Learning (AML) / Data Analysis and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DAAI) 

Learning to spot mistakes in procedural activities 
Teaching Assistants: Simone Alberto Peirone, Gaetano Salvatore Falco 

Link to this document (check for updates) - Current version: 1.1 (5 Dec. 2025) 

UPDATES: 

- 5/12/2025: 

- You can ﬁnd the resized captain cook videos at this link. 
- 

If you have troubles in setting things up on colab, you can ﬁnd a cleaned up 
version of the ofﬁcial repository at this link. There is also a very basic 
quickstart colab notebook. 

🚨 IMPORTANT: 
For assistance during the development of this project, join the speciﬁc discord channel. 
We will organize weekly meetings until the end of the course to answer your questions. 

An illustration of a humanoid robot preparing a recipe and suddenly realizing it made a mistake in the preparation (ChatGPT) 

Project overview 

Think about your typical morning routine. You wake up and decide to prepare an omelette. 
Even a simple recipe requires you to follow a sequence of steps (a so-called procedure): 
breaking the eggs, mixing them with the ingredients, and ﬁnally cooking the omelette. 
Some steps can be omitted, maybe you don’t want cheese in your omelette, while others 
can be reordered or interleaved, such as changing the order in which you mix the 
ingredients. But then you get a call from a friend and forget about the pan. When you come 
back, the omelette is visibly burnt. Something went wrong in the process, and you need to 
start over. 

1 

 
 
 
 
Advanced Machine Learning (AML) / Data Analysis and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DAAI) 

A recipe execution with different kind of intentional and unintentional errors 

In this project we will focus on procedure understanding, a ﬁeld that deals with teaching 
models to recognize, segment, and reason about the sequence of actions that compose 
complex human activities. Most speciﬁcally, we will explore the mistake detection task, 
which involves detecting and recognizing different kinds of errors in the steps of a 
procedural activity. In this setting, you will learn about task graphs, a compact 
representation of the sequential steps required to complete a recipe. Task graphs are a 
special form of directed acyclic graphs. They can be manually annotated, or directly learnt 
from multiple human demonstrations of the same recipe [PL2]. Given a video of a recipe 
and its corresponding task graph, we can predict whether the recipe was executed correctly 
or not by verifying that the steps satisfy one of the possible paths of the task graph. 

Task graphs and different recipe executions from CaptainCook4D 

The project is articulated as follows. In the ﬁrst part of the project, you will train simple 
baseline models to predict the correctness of a procedure step from its corresponding 
video snippet. Then, you will have the chance to develop an extension. In the suggested 
extension, we move beyond mistake detection to a task veriﬁcation setting, where the goal 
is to classify the correctness of an entire video recipe given its corresponding task graph. 

Alternatively, you may propose a different extension. Please discuss this with the teaching 
assistant before you start working on the extension to ensure that everything is clear. 

Project setup and technical details 

This project is meant to be developed using the free GPU resources provided by Google 
Colab, an hosted Jupyter notebook platform. Google Colab provides an easy way to 

2 

 
 
Advanced Machine Learning (AML) / Data Analysis and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DAAI) 

connect the notebooks to Google Drive for data storage. Keep your code on Github 
(forking the project repository) and all the features, videos and annotations on Google 
Drive. Each time you start up a new notebook, you can copy the data you need from Drive 
to the local instance your notebook is running on. 

Step 1: Literature Review 

In this step, you should become familiar with the most relevant works in procedural activity 
understanding. Start from the suggested papers in the Reference section of this document, 
focusing on the CaptainCook4D dataset [PL1], and some of the most recent works in 
Procedure Learning [PL2, PL3]. You don’t need to fully understand each paper at this stage, 
you should just grasp the main concepts. 

Step 2: Mistake Detection baselines 

TL;DR: In this step, you will train a few simple baseline for ofﬂine mistake detection, aiming 
to reproduce the results reported in the CaptainCook4D paper. 

In the Supervised Error Recognition task (SupervisedER), the goal is to classify a video 
segment (few seconds/minutes) corresponding to a procedure step as either correct or 
incorrect execution (binary classiﬁcation task). The CaptainCook4D paper proposes three 
simple baselines for this task. The ﬁrst (V1) is a simple Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) head 
trained on top of pre-extracted sub-segment features. V2 leverages a Transformer layer to 
combine the cues from all sub-segments in the recipe step to predict whether the execution 
is correct or not. V3 combines visual (RGB) inputs with textual narrations, audio recordings 
and depth information to further improve the prediction accuracy. For this project, we will 
consider only baselines V1 and V2. 

3 

Advanced Machine Learning (AML) / Data Analysis and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DAAI) 

Supervised Error Recognition baselines from CaptainCook4D 

Substeps: 

1. 📌 Download the pre-extracted features. Training video models is very 

computationally expensive. As a result, we typically overcome this issue by 
leveraging transfer learning, reusing models trained on large scale datasets with 
some generic training objectives (e.g., action recognition or contrastive 
video-language alignment) to extract high-level representations of the input video. 
Following the CaptainCook4D paper, we consider the following pre-trained 
backbones: Omnivore and SlowFast. Pre-extracted features are provided as part of 
the dataset release and you can download them from here. 

a. Look for details in the CaptainCook4D paper describing the features 

extraction process. What are the input and outputs of the pre-trained models 
in this phase? 

2. 📌 Reproduce the the V1 and V2 baselines from the CaptainCook4D. In this step you 
should replicate the results of the V1 (MLP) and V2 (Transformer-based) baselines on 
the SupervisedER task from the original paper, using the same metrics (Accuracy, 
Precision, Recall, F1 and AUC). 

a. 

In addition to the metrics from the original paper, you should analyze the 
performance of the model on different error types. 

b. Propose a new baseline for this task and compare with the existing ones. For 
example, you could train an RNN/LSTM on the sequence corresponding to 
each step. 

4 

 
Advanced Machine Learning (AML) / Data Analysis and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DAAI) 

3. 📌 Extend the baselines to a new features extraction backbone. Adapt the features 
extraction code provided by CaptainCook4D to support a new features extraction 
backbone. Some of the backbones you may consider include EgoVLP [VB4] and 
PerceptionEncoder [VB5]. You can download a resized version of the dataset from 
here. 

Extension: From Mistake Detection to Task Veriﬁcation 

TL;DR: in this extension we move beyond mistake detection to a task veriﬁcation, where the 
objective is to predict whether an entire video recipe represents a correct execution. 

🚨Please discuss the extension with the TA before starting! 

Detecting mistakes could be useful, but ultimately we care about whether the recipe was 
correctly completed as a whole. In this extension, we move beyond mistake detection to a 
broader task veriﬁcation setting, where the objective is to predict whether a given recipe 
video corresponds to a correct or incorrect execution, by looking jointly at the video and 
the corresponding task graph. Unlike mistake detection, this formulation does not require 
step-level annotations about the correctness of the execution of the individual steps. 
Instead, we only need a single recipe-level binary label indicating whether the overall 
execution is correct or incorrect. 

In this extension, we consider a three stage pipeline. First, we use a pre-trained step 
localization network to detect individual steps in an input recipe video. Then, we match 
each detected step to the corresponding node in the task graph. Task graphs represent all 
possible (correct) executions of a recipe. By matching the task graphs with the detected 
steps in the video, we obtain a “realization” of the task graph. Finally, we learn a classiﬁer 
to predict whether the observed task graph corresponds to a correct or incorrect recipe. 

 ⚠ For this extension, you should use the EgoVLP or PerceptionEncoder features you 
extracted in the Step 2 of the project. For these encoders, the video and text embedding 
spaces are aligned, allowing us to match the visual features of the steps to the textual 
encoding of the steps in the task graph. 

Substep 1: Recipe step localization 
In this ﬁrst step, you should use a step localization approach to segment the individual 
steps of a recipe video. You can use different approaches, like the pre-trained ActionFormer 
model provided as part of CaptainCook4D, or a zero-shot clustering-based approach like 
HiERO [PL4]. The output of the model is a list of tuples (start, end) that identify the start and 
end timestamps of each step in the video. 

Then, for each step you should compute a unique step-level embedding by averaging all 
the video features that fall within the (start, end) boundaries of the step. As a result, for each 
video you will have a sequence of step-level embeddings, summarizing the visual features 
of the detected steps. 

Substep 2: Simple Task-Veriﬁcation baselines 
In this step, you should train a simple baseline for task-veriﬁcation on the recipe videos 
using binary labels to identify correct and incorrect executions. For example, you can deﬁne 

5 

Advanced Machine Learning (AML) / Data Analysis and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DAAI) 

the model as a transformer layer that takes the sequence of step-level embeddings, 
followed by a binary classiﬁcation head (you can take inspiration from the Transformer 
baseline for error recognition). 

Given the limited number of samples in the dataset, you can consider a leave-one-out 
evaluation setting in which the model is trained on (k-1) recipes and tested on the k-th 
recipe. 

Substep 3: Task-Graph encoding + Step matching 
In this step, you should take the ground truth task graphs provided by CaptainCook4D and 
encode the textual descriptions of their steps using the EgoVLP/PE textual encoder. The 
features of the task graph’s nodes and the visual features extracted in Substep 1 are 
aligned, hence we can ﬁnd for each step in the video the best matching node in the task 
graph and vice versa. You can assume each visual step can be matched to at most one node 
(and vice versa) and use the Hungarian matching algorithm to match all the steps to the 
nodes. 

Then, update the features of the matched nodes with a learnable projection of the node 
features and the visual features. 

Substep 4: Classiﬁcation of the observed task-graph 
In this ﬁnal step, you should train a simple Graph Neural Network (GNN) based classiﬁer to 
predict whether the execution is correct or not from the realization of the task-graph. Use 
this notebook as a reference for the training. You are free to experiment with different GNN 
layers. For example, DAGNN [O1] is a layer speciﬁcally designed for directed acyclic 
graphs. 

Project Deliverables 
For the exam, you are expected to produce a report of your project using the CVPR 
template. The report must be 8 pages-long and follow the typical paper-like structure 
(abstract, introduction, related works, method, experiment and conclusion). Clearly explain 
everything you did in the project, focusing on the implementation of the extension. 

References 

Procedure Learning (PL): 

1. Peddi, Rohith, et al. "CaptainCook4D: A dataset for understanding errors in procedural 

activities." NeurIPS 2024. 

2. Seminara, Luigi, et al. "Differentiable Task Graph Learning: Procedural Activity 

Representation and Online Mistake Detection from Egocentric Videos." NeurIPS 2024. 

3. Flaborea, Alessandro, et al. "PREGO: online mistake detection in PRocedural EGOcentric 

videos." CVPR 2024. 

4. Peirone, Simone Alberto, et al. "HiERO: understanding the hierarchy of human behavior 

enhances reasoning on egocentric videos." ICCV 2025. 

6 

Advanced Machine Learning (AML) / Data Analysis and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DAAI) 

5. Bansal, Siddhant et al. "My view is the best view: Procedure learning from egocentric 

videos." ECCV 2022. 

6. Chowdhury, Sayeed Shafayet et al. "Opel: Optimal transport guided procedure learning." 

NeurIPS 2024. 

Video Backbones (VB): 

1. Girdhar, Rohit, et al. "Omnivore: A single model for many visual modalities." CVPR 2022. 

2. Feichtenhofer, Christoph, et al. "Slowfast networks for video recognition." ICCV 2019. 

3. Girdhar, Rohit, et al. "Imagebind: One embedding space to bind them all." CVPR 2023. 

4. Lin, Kevin Qinghong, et al. "Egocentric video-language pretraining." NeurIPS 2022. 

5. Bolya, Daniel, et al. "Perception encoder: The best visual embeddings are not at the output 

of the network." arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13181 (2025). 

Others (O): 

1. Thost, Veronika et al. "Directed Acyclic Graph Neural Networks." International Conference 

on Learning Representations. 

7